Karnataka, state of India, located on the western coast of the subcontinent. It is bounded by the states of Goa and Maharashtra to the north, Telangana to the east, Tamil Nadu to the southeast, and Kerala to the south and by the Arabian Sea to the west. The state extends for about 420 miles (675 km) from north to south and for about 300 miles (480 km) from east to west. Its coastline stretches for some 200 miles (320 km). The capital is Bengaluru (Bangalore), near the southeastern border.

Before the independence of India in 1947, Mysore was a prosperous and progressive but landlocked princely state, with an area of less than 30,000 square miles (78,000 square km), located on the Karnataka Plateau. The transfer of additional territories to the state in 1953 and 1956 united the Kannada-speaking peoples, gave the state an outlet to the sea, and greatly extended its boundaries. The state took its present name, a Kannada word meaning “lofty land,” in 1973. Area 74,051 square miles (191,791 square km). Pop. (2011) 61,130,704.

The climate of Karnataka is subtropical, with winter (January and February), summer (March through May), southwest monsoon (June through September), and post-monsoon (October through December) seasons. Maximum daily temperatures in winter reach the upper 80s F (low 30s C), whereas in the summer months temperatures rise into the low 100s F (about 40 °C). Annual precipitation ranges from roughly 20 inches (500 mm) in the drier portions of the Maidan to nearly 160 inches (4,000 mm) in the wettest parts of the coastal plain. Most of the state’s annual precipitation falls between June and September; much of the remainder is brought by a less-significant northeast monsoon that blows during the post-monsoon season. The winter months are particularly dry.

Agriculture engages the majority of the population. The coastal plain is intensively cultivated, with rice as the principal food crop, followed by sorghum (jowar) and millet (ragi). Sugarcane is the main cash crop, supplemented by cashews, cardamom, betel (areca) nut, and grapes. Coffee and tea plantations are located on the cool slopes of the Western Ghats; Karnataka is one of the country’s chief sources of coffee. In the eastern region, irrigation enables the cultivation of sugarcane, some rubber, and such fruits as bananas and oranges. The black soil of the northwest supports cotton, oilseeds, and peanuts (groundnuts).

The forests of the Malnad area in the west produce a significant portion of the world’s supply of sandalwood. Oil processed from sandalwood in Mysuru also is a leading state export. Other important forest products include teak, eucalyptus, rosewood, bamboo, and such substances as tanning dyes, gums, and lac (used in the manufacture of varnishes).

Resources and power
Karnataka is mineral-rich. The state is a major source of chromite, and it is one of the few states of India that produces magnesite. High-grade iron ore reserves are tapped most notably in Bellary district, in the east-central part of the state. Kolar Gold Fields, near Bengaluru, yielded much of the country’s gold in the 20th century; by the early 21st century, however, virtual depletion of the deposits and high operating costs forced the mines to close. Other minerals that have been extracted in Karnataka, albeit in small quantities, include mica, copper ore, bauxite, and garnet.

Karnataka’s many hydroelectric plants generate enough power not only to meet local needs but also to distribute to neighbouring states. The hydroelectric station on the Sharavati River near Jog Falls is an especially large facility that supplies power to many of Karnataka’s industries. Additional energy is provided by thermal- and wind-powered plants.

Manufacturing
The mineral resources of the state feed the iron and steel mills of Bhadravati and the heavy engineering works of Bengaluru. Other industries in the state include cotton milling, sugar processing, and the manufacture of textiles, food products, electrical machinery, fertilizers, cement, and paper. Both Mysuru and Bengaluru have long-established sericulture industries that produce much of India’s mulberry silk.

Transportation
The obstacle formed by the Western Ghats has hindered the building of railroads to link the state’s numerous minor ports to the plateau in the interior. Bengaluru, in the southeast, is the main focus of rail transportation. The port of Mangaluru, in the southwest, is connected to Mumbai (Bombay) in Mahrashtra by tracks running parallel to the coast through the state of Goa.

The import and export trade relies primarily on road transport, but many roads in the western part of the state become impassable during the rainy season. National highways run from Bengaluru east to Chennai (Madras) in Tamil Nadu, north to Hyderabad in Telangana, northwest to Mumbai, and west through Hassan to the coast of Mangalore. Airports are located at Bengaluru, Belgavi, and Mangaluru.